So we've seen how me can mean me, to me or myself, and te can mean you, to you or yourself.
And nos can mean us, to us, or ourselves.
So we want to resist the temptation to translate this to.
So for example, he speaks to me,
we don't need this to because me, me, can mean me, to me or myself.
So we want to resist the temptation to translate that to.
So how do you say he speaks to me or he's speaking to me?
Habla me. Sorry, me habla.
Yeah, don't let that to confuse you about the position it should go. It's still going before, me habla.
They speak to me:
Me hablan.
Good.
If you want to say they speak to me about it, you can just say they speak me it in Spanish.
Me lo hablan.
Me lo hablan. Very good. They're speaking to me about it.
So this to and this about, we notice Spanish tends not to need these words as much as English does.
For example, to buy was comprar, comprar.
Comprar.
Good.
So this me other than to me can be for me, from me, we don't really need these words.
So for example, if we want to say he buys it for me we can just say he buys me it.
So comprar is to buy. He buys it for me, he buys me it:
Me lo compra.
Good. Me lo compra.
So here we see me is like for me here. But it's just me, we're just using me.
I buy it for you, speaking informally. I buy it for you:
Te lo compro.
Good. Te lo compro.
Now, if you want to say shall I buy it for you,
shall in English, all it's doing really is just making it a question.
Shall I buy it for you?
So in Spanish, just make it sound like a question.
¿Te lo compro?
Yeah! ¿Te lo compro? Shall I buy it for you?
Now this could actually even mean from you.
Shall I buy it from you?
So by the context we'll understand the difference.
Maybe you will hear if you travel to a Spanish-speaking country, people say, buy me selling things in the street
Buy me something is what you will hear.
And they're probably not asking you to buy them something, but to buy something from them.
And it's understood and we don't really need to use these words like from or for most of the time.
To do was hacer, hacer. How would you say do you want to do (speaking informally)?
Hacer is an irregular verb.
It doesn't matter, does it? Do you want to do?:
Ah!
¿Quieres hacer?
Good.
Do you want to do it?
¿Quieres hacerlo?
Good. ¿Quieres hacerlo?
Now how do you think you would say: do you want to do it for me?:
¿Me lo quieres hacer?
Yes.
¿Me lo quieres hacer? So, we are not using the word for for for. We don't need it in Spanish, it's understood.
Do you want to do it for me? ¿Me lo quieres hacer? ¿Quieres hacérmelo? Good.
The kitchen in Spanish is la cocina, /la cosina/, or in most of Spain, /la cothina/. La cocina.
La cocina.
And to cook is cocinar. You just make a verb from cocina, cocinar.
Actually this is where we get concoction, concoction from in English, "with cooking".
So how would you say I cook from cocinar?
Cocino.
Good.
How do you say he cooks or she cooks or it cooks or usted, you (formal) cook?
Cocina.
Good.
You (informal)?
Cocinas.
Good.
And with emphasis or clarification if you want to use the word for you?
Usted.
But this is informal, cocinas.
Ah sorry!
Tú cocinas.
Tú cocinas. Good. They cook or you guys?
Cocinan.
Good.
What if you wanted to use the word for they, to emphasize or to clarify?
Ellos cocinan.
Ellos cocinan. Good.
Or ellas if it's a female group.
Or if you wanted to say you guys are cooking with the emphasis or the clarification?
Ustedes cocinan.
Good. Ustedes cocinan.
And we cook? What is we cook?
Cocinamos.
Good.
And with the emphasis or the clarification?
Nosotros cocinamos.
Good. Nosotros cocinamos. Good.
How would you say I can?
How is I can, related to power?
Puedo.
Puedo. Good. And he can:
Puede.
Good. Puede. And you can (informal):
Puedes.
Good.
Can you cook?:
¿Puedes cocinar?
Good.
Can you cook something for me?
So what was the word for something?
Algo.
Good.
How do you think you are gonna say this in Spanish? Can you cook something for me?:
¿Me puedes cocinar algo?
Good. ¿Me puedes cocinar algo?
¿Puedes cocinarme algo? Either way.
So how would you say I have cooked? I have cooked:
He cocinado.
He cocinado. Good.
So we said that this tense of have cooked, I have cooked instead of I cooked, we can use it more in Spanish than in English.
So for example in English it sounds much more natural to say I cooked at 6 o'clock,
but in Spanish it's not a problem to say I have cooked at 6 o'clock.
So, at 6 o'clock is a las seis. What you actually mean when you say a las seis is a las seis horas. "At the six hours".
A little bit like in English when you say "at sixteen hundred hours".
A las seis.
So how would you say I have cooked at 6 o'clock? I cooked at 6 o'clock:
He cocinado a las seis.
Good. He cocinado a las seis. I have cooked at six o'clock. I cooked at six o'clock. Good.
The word for eight in Spanish is ocho. Ocho.
Ocho.
Ocho. We have this similar root in octagon, you know, a shape with eight sides.
Or octopus, which has eight legs. Or in October, which, well now it's the tenth month, in the Roman calendar there were only ten months and October was month number eight.
So, ocho, eight.
How would you say we have cooked at eight o'clock? We have cooked at eight o'clock:
Hemos cocinado a las ocho.
Good. Hemos cocinado a las ocho.
The word for nine in Spanish is nueve.
Nueve.
We can see in November, which used to be the ninth month. The o splits into ue, nueve.
And we have the same with ten.
Ten is diez or /dieth/ in most of Spain. Diez.
What does that sound like, if you go back to our calendar?
December?
December, which used to be the tenth month and of course again an example of splitting. Dec to diez.
Quedar in Spanish, quedar, means to remain, or to be left over
and it actually has quite a few other meanings as well, it's quite a flexible verb, quedar.
But for now, to remain or to be left over. Q-u-e-d-a-r. Quedar.
And q-u in Spanish is always a k sound.
You must resist any temptation to pronounce /qwedar/, if you were to read this.
The word que, the word for what that we learned is spelled q-u-e.
Quiero is spelled q-u-i-e-r-o.
So q-u this combination is always a k.
Quedar means to remain.
So in Spanish if you want to say I stay actually you say I remain myself.
This is the way you say I stay in Spanish.
So we start with remain which is quedar. So how do you say I remain?
Quiedo.
It doesn't split here but good for trying.
Quedo?
Quedo.
I remain myself?
Me quedo.
Me quedo. This means I stay. Me quedo.
Until, until in Spanish is hasta. Hasta. H-a-s-t-a.
You may have heard hasta la vista. Until the view, literally until the seeing, until we see each other. Hasta la vista.
So now you can say I am staying here until ten o'clock. So let's divide it up. I am staying here, I remain myself here:
Me quedo aquí.
Until?
Hasta.
Ten o'clock. So—
Las diez.
Yes. Las diez. It's literally like las diez horas, but you don't say horas. Maybe historically people said it, but not anymore.
Me quedo aquí, or acá, hasta las diez. Good. I am staying until ten o'clock.
So if me quedo, I remain myself is I am staying, how do you think you would say we are staying?
Nos quedemos.
Good, but now you have some vowel harmony popping in because we were concentrating on the other bit, so this mistake managed to come back.
Quedamos?
Good! Because it's quedar. No? Nos quedamos. We remain ourselves. We stay.
So we are staying until nine o'clock:
Nos quedamos hasta las nueve.
Good. Nos quedamos hasta las nueve. Very good. Very good.
You stay or you remain yourself (speaking informally):
Te quedas.
Good. Te quedas. You are staying here:
Te quedas aquí.
Te quedas aquí. Are you staying here?:
¿Te quedas aquí?
Good. ¿Te quedas aquí?
How would you make it emphatic now? Are YOU staying here?
Because this te is not emphatic, it is not optional.
You have to put this me in me quedo to get the meaning of stay
and we have to put this te in te quedas to get the meaning of stay.
But if we want to make it emphatic, what do we add?
¿Tú te quedas?
Good.
I am staying, emphatic.
Yo me quedo.
Good. Yo me quedo. Good. We are staying:
Nos quedamos.
Nos quedamos. Good.
WE are staying:
Nosotros nos quedamos.
Nosotros nos quedamos. Very good.